Graphs 2.1: Overview (#59)
Ada-Developers-Academy/ada-CS-Fundamentals-Internship: 09-graphs-p2/01-graphs-review.md

## Review of Breadth First Search & Depth First Search

### Breadth First Search (BFS)
You may recall from the last lesson that the Breadth First Search (BFS) algorithm starts with a particular node and then visits each node connected to the starting point before expanding outward.

The BFS algorithm requires us to use a queue to visit nodes in a "level-by-level" ordering by adding each of the neighbors of the starting node to the queue. We then loop through the queue, adding unvisited neighbors to the list of visited nodes as well as to the queue to be further processed.

### Depth First Search (DFS)
You may also recall from the last lesson that the Depth First Search (DFS) algorithm starts at a node and then follows a path as deeply as possible before backing up and following the next path. We refer to this algorithm as a back-tracking algorithm.

The DFS algorithm requires the use of a stack. The stack is used to further process nodes along the path, starting with the first node and then adding its neighbors to the stack before iterating on the nodes added to the stack. 

### Why DFS does not find shortest path

> The main reason the DFS algorithm is not typically used to find the shortest path is because DFS is not a "greedy" algorithm. The algorithm is not designed to account for changes in logic based on the data it encounters, which is what is needed for finding the shortest path in a graph.

Reviewer: This makes sense to me and I really like the callout, but I'm not sure students will have a strong enough grasp on this for this to give them a strong intuition since they haven't learned about different categories of algorithms yet. 

An explanation that has worked well for me in the past is to highlight that BFS chooses to visit nodes based on how close they are and we can leverage that to find the shortest path. DFS does not take nodes' proximity into consideration when making its traversal, so it's not useful for tracking the distance between nodes.

## !callout
A greedy algorithm is an approach for solving a problem by selecting the best option available at the moment. A greedy algorithm never reverses the earlier decision even if the choise is wrong. An algorithm which is considered greedy may not produce the best result for all problems.
## !end-callout

### Why BFS (kinda) allows for shortest path of an unweighted graph

> By itself, BFS does *not* allow for finding the shortest path of an unweighted graph. In order to retrieve the shortest path using the BFS algorithm, one would need to modify the algorithm to store the current shortest distance to the target node as well as the preceding node in the shortest path. This is essentially what Djikstra's algorithm does, which we will learn more about in the next section.

Reviewer: I like calling out that the version of BFS we had them implement would not allow them to find the shortest path, we would need to store preceding nodes to allow for backtracking.

However, it might be helpful to expand more upon how BFS operates - it visits nodes based on proximity. It first visits all neighbors, aka all nodes that are one edge away from the start node, then the neighbor's neighbors aka all nodes that are two edges away, etc. I personally like returning to the BST to visualize this (a subtype of a graph here) since it is by nature hierarchical and has 'levels'. 

I also like setting them up for Dijkstra's here. It could be helpful to contrast them by clarifying the difference is it uses weights to determine the next node to consider rather than the number of 'hops'/edges.

##### !end-question

##### !options

a| Breadth First Search
b| Depth First Search
c| Either
d| Neither

##### !end-options

##### !answer

b|

##### !end-answer

##### !explanation

The correct answer is B because it is faster and more efficent to reach nodes deeper in the graph with Depth First Search.

##### !end-explanation 

### !end-challenge

### !challenge

* type: multiple-choice
* id: b8569433-61d6-48e0-afa2-5b28e3e9facf
* title: BFS, DFS, Either, or Neither?
* points: 0

##### !question

If we are looking to find all the connected nodes in a graph, is BFS, DFS, Either, or Neither the best option?

##### !end-question

##### !options

a| Breadth First Search
b| Depth First Search
c| Either
d| Neither

##### !end-options

##### !answer

a|

##### !end-answer

##### !explanation

The correct answer is A because BFS allows us to find which nodes are connected to one another in an efficient manner. We would not necessarily want to use DFS to find all connected nodes because the algorithm does not lend itself to finding connected nodes efficiently. 

> For instance, if we are looking to see if a node 2 levels away from the starting node is connected, the DFS algorithm may need to run for a much longer time to find that connected node that is placed nearby in the graph in comparison to the BFS algorithm which will find the connected node much sooner.

Reviewer: The question and the explanation don't totally align for me.

An overall traversal of the graph from a start node will return the list of connected nodes for both BFS and DFS and I believe both have the same time complexity with DFS being on average slightly faster.

Your explanation does make sense with your example of looking for a node 2 levels away, but with the way the question is phrased I was thinking more about which option would allow me to find the set of all connected nodes.

Maybe rephrasing the question to check if two nodes are connected?

##### !end-explanation 

### !end-challenge

<!-- ======================= END CHALLENGE ======================= -->

## Introduction to Djikstra's Algorithm

> As mentioned earlier, BFS does not allow for finding the shortest path between two nodes without some additional modifications. One way to utilize the BFS algorithm to find the shortest distance between two nodes is by implementing what is called Djikstra's Algorithm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned earlier, a modified version of BFS only allows us to find the shortest path between two nodes in an unweighted graph. One way to further modify the BFS algorithm to find the shortest distance between two nodes is by implementing what is called Djikstra's Algorithm. 
```

### Depth First Search (DFS)
You may also recall from the last lesson that the Depth First Search (DFS) algorithm starts at a node and then follows a path as deeply as possible before backing up and following the next path. We refer to this algorithm as a back-tracking algorithm.

The DFS algorithm requires the use of a stack. The stack is used to further process nodes along the path, starting with the first node and then adding its neighbors to the stack before iterating on the nodes added to the stack.

#### DFS Visualization
<iframe src="https://adaacademy.hosted.panopto.com/Panopto/Pages/Embed.aspx?id=757ce80b-3cc5-4ae0-bdf1-af240146d5a0&autoplay=false&offerviewer=true&showtitle=true&showbrand=false&captions=true&interactivity=all" height="405" width="720" style="border: 1px solid #464646;" allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>

### Why BFS (kinda) allows for shortest path of an unweighted graph

> By itself, BFS does *not* allow for finding the shortest path of an unweighted graph. In order to retrieve the shortest path using the BFS algorithm, one would need to modify the algorithm to store the current shortest distance to the target node as well as the preceding node in the shortest path. This is essentially what Dijkstra's algorithm does, which we will learn more about in the next section. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By itself, BFS as we developed it does *not* allow for finding the shortest path of an unweighted graph. In order to retrieve the shortest path using the BFS algorithm, we would need to modify the algorithm to store the current shortest distance to the target node as well as the preceding node in the shortest path. This is essentially what Dijkstra's algorithm does, which we will learn more about in the next section. 
```

> Again, you may recall BFS visits nodes based on *proximity*. It starts by visiting nodes one edge away (its neighbors). Then visits its neighbor's neighbors (nodes that are two edges away from the starting node), and etc. Therefore, the BFS algorithm can be modified to record the smallest path from an initial node to any other connected node in the graph. The big difference between Dijkstra's Algorithm and BFS is that Dijkstra's uses the *weights* of the edges to determine the next node to consider rather than just the number of edges. Again, we'll talk about Dijkstra's algorithm more in the next section.

Reviewer: Just modifying so that using neighbors vs edges to describe proximity is consistent in order
```suggestion
Again, you may recall BFS visits nodes based on *proximity*. It starts by visiting nodes one edge away from the start node (its neighbors). Then it visits nodes that are two edges away from the starting node (neighbor's neighbors), etc. Therefore, the BFS algorithm can be modified to record the smallest path from an initial node to any other connected node in the graph. The big difference between Dijkstra's Algorithm and BFS is that Dijkstra's uses the *weights* of the edges to determine the next node to consider rather than just the number of edges. Again, we'll talk about Dijkstra's algorithm more in the next section.
```
